Changes for 9.0, with porting instructions and renaming advice (#20168)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/changes.rst

Version 9.0
-----------

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Summary of changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The Rocq Prover version 9 is the first Rocq Prover release after the renaming
> from The Coq Proof Assistant. The Rocq Prover 9.0.0 command line interface is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Rocq Prover version 9.0 is the first Rocq Prover release after the renaming
from The Coq Proof Assistant. The Rocq Prover 9.0 command line interface is
```

backwards compatible with Coq 8.20, providing compatibility shims so that
developments depending on Coq can be easily ported, see `Porting to The Rocq
Prover`_  for details. The 9.0 version is based on a new single binary `rocq`
that dispatches commands to previously separate binaries, a split and renaming
of the standard library to `Stdlib` and improvements to the handling of
template-polymorphism, bringing it closer to a complete subsumption by sort
polymorphism.

We highlight some of the most impactful changes here:

  - "The Rocq Prover" is the new official name of the project. We leave to users the
    choice of renaming their projects to reflect this change, see `Renaming Advice`_.
    The Rocq Prover comes with a new visual identity and website, see `The Rocq Prover Website`_.

  - A single `rocq` binary dispatches commands for compilation, read-eval-print-loop,
    documentation building, dependency computation, etc... see :ref:`therocqcommands`.

>     It corresponds to the `rocq-runtime` `OCaml package <https://ocaml.org/p/rocq-runtime>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It corresponds to the `rocq-runtime` `opam package <https://ocaml.org/p/rocq-runtime>`_.
```

    This is a bare-bones package not depending on any Gallina code.
    CHECK LINK

>   - The `Coq` standard library has been renamed and :ref:`split <90stdlib>` into two libraries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The `Coq` standard library has been :ref:`split <90stdlib>` into two libraries:
```

    - A `Corelib` core library (the `rocq-core` opam package). This is an

>       extended prelude corresponding to the `rocq-core` OCaml package, which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      extended prelude, which is
```

      enough to run `rocq` tactics and contains the `Ltac2` library and bindings
      for primitive types (integers, floats, arrays and strings).
    - An `Stdlib` standard library (the `rocq-stdlib` opam package). The `Stdlib` is

>       now maintained `out of <https://github.com/rocq-prover/stdlib>`_ the main `rocq`
>       `repository <http://github/com/rocq-prover/rocq>`_. We welcome new maintainers and
>       contributors to the new repository, a specific call for contributions will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      now maintained out of the main `rocq` repository. We welcome maintainers and
      contributors to the `new repository <https://github.com/rocq-prover/stdlib>`_.
      A specific call for contributions will be
```

      sent soon.

Notable breaking changes:

  - TODO

See the `Changes in 9.0.0`_ section below for the detailed list of changes,
including potentially breaking changes marked with **Changed**.
Rocq's `reference manual for 9.0 <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman>`_,
documentation of the 9.0 `core <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/corelib>`_ and
`standard <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/stdlib>`_ libraries,
`reference manual of the 9.0 standard library <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman-stdlib>`_
and `developer documentation of the 9.0 ML API <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/api>`_
are also available.

Théo Zimmermann with help from Ali Caglayan and Jason Gross maintained
`coqbot <https://github.com/coq/bot>`_ used to run Coq's CI and other
pull request management tasks.

Jason Gross maintained the `bug minimizer <https://github.com/JasonGross/coq-tools>`_
and its `automatic use through coqbot <https://github.com/coq/coq/wiki/Coqbot-minimize-feature>`_.

Erik Martin-Dorel maintained the

> `Coq Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq>`_
> and the `docker-keeper <https://gitlab.com/erikmd/docker-keeper>`_ compiler
> used to build and keep those images up to date (note that the tool is not Rocq specific).
> Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
> maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_
> used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.

Reviewer 2: Hi! (Cc @Zimmi48 @mattam82)

Some suggestions:

* you could include the new URL of Docker-Rocq images: https://hub.docker.com/rocq/rocq-prover
* you could also mention the docker-coq-action: https://github.com/coq-community/docker-coq-action (maintained by @Zimmi48 and me; (its rename to docker-opam-action is pending)
* finally the phrasing could tell that *both* docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for CI  (cf. this previous [release](https://coq.inria.fr/doc/V8.17.0/refman/changes.html#version-8-17) for example, where the phrasing highlight more the CI use case for Docker as well)

Tentatively:
```suggestion
`Rocq Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/r/rocq/rocq-prover>`_
and the `docker-keeper <https://gitlab.com/erikmd/docker-keeper>`_ compiler
used to build and keep those images up to date (note that the tool is not Rocq specific).
Erik Martin-Dorel and Théo Zimmermann maintained the
`docker-coq-action <https://github.com/coq-community/docker-coq-action`_
container action (which is applicable to any opam project hosted on GitHub).
Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_.
The docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.
```

WDYT?

> Erik Martin-Dorel maintained the
> `Coq Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq>`_
> and the `docker-keeper <https://gitlab.com/erikmd/docker-keeper>`_ compiler
> used to build and keep those images up to date (note that the tool is not Rocq specific).
> Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
> maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_
> used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.

Reviewer 2: Hi! (Cc @Zimmi48 @mattam82)

Some suggestions (v2):

* you could include the new URL of Docker-Rocq images: https://hub.docker.com/r/rocq/rocq-prover
* you could also mention the docker-coq-action: https://github.com/coq-community/docker-coq-action (maintained by @Zimmi48 and me; its rename to docker-opam-action is pending)
* finally the phrasing could tell that *both* docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for CI  (cf. this previous [release](https://coq.inria.fr/doc/V8.17.0/refman/changes.html#version-8-17) for example, where the phrasing highlighted more the CI use case for Docker).

Tentatively:
```suggestion
Erik Martin-Dorel and Jaime Arias maintained the
`Rocq Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/r/rocq/rocq-prover>`_.
Erik Martin-Dorel maintained the `docker-keeper <https://gitlab.com/erikmd/docker-keeper>`_ compiler
used to build and keep those images up to date (note that the tool is not Rocq specific).
Erik Martin-Dorel and Théo Zimmermann maintained the
`docker-coq-action <https://github.com/coq-community/docker-coq-action>`_
container action (which is applicable to any opam project hosted on GitHub).
Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_.
The docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.
```

Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_.
The docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.

Ali Caglayan, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Rudi Grinberg and
Rodolphe Lepigre maintained the
`Dune build system for OCaml and Coq/Rocq <https://github.com/ocaml/dune/>`_
used to build Rocq itself and many Rocq projects.

The `opam repository <https://github.com/coq/opam>`_ for Rocq packages has been maintained by
Guillaume Claret, Guillaume Melquiond, Karl Palmskog, Matthieu Sozeau
and Enrico Tassi with contributions from many users. The up-to-data list

> of packages is `available on the Rocq website <https://rocq-prover.org/packages>`_.

Reviewer 3: This could be made closer from the docker paragraph above since it is highly related (docker images fundamentally rely on the opam repo).

See the `Rocq Team <https://rocq-prover.org/governance>`_ page for
more details on Rocq's development teams.

The ?? contributors to the 9.0 version are:
TODO

The Coq/Rocq community at large helped improve this new version via
the GitHub issue and pull request system, the coq-club@inria.fr mailing list,
the `Discourse forum <https://coq.discourse.group/>`_ and the
`Coq Zulip chat <https://coq.zulipchat.com>`_.

Version 9.0's development spanned 7 months from the release of Coq 8.20.0.
Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau are the release managers of Rocq 9.0.
This release is the result of ?? merged PRs, closing ?? issues.

| Nantes, January 2025
| Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau for the Rocq development team

Porting to The Rocq Prover
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Rocq Prover version 9.0 includes support for compability shims that allow
to call it through legacy Coq commands (`coq-tex`, `coq_makefile`, `coqchk`, `coqdoc`, `coqpp`, `coqtop`,
`coqwc`, `coqc`, `coqdep`, `coqnative`, `coqtimelog2html`, `coqtop.byte`, `coqworkmgr`)

> so that it can act as a regular `Coq` version. If using `opam`, this compatibility

Reviewer 3: maybe
```suggestion
so that it can act as a regular `Coq` version. When using `opam`, this compatibility
```

> The Rocq Prover version 9.0 includes support for compability shims that allow
> to call it through legacy Coq commands (`coq-tex`, `coq_makefile`, `coqchk`, `coqdoc`, `coqpp`, `coqtop`,
> `coqwc`, `coqc`, `coqdep`, `coqnative`, `coqtimelog2html`, `coqtop.byte`, `coqworkmgr`)
> so that it can act as a regular `Coq` version. If using `opam`, this compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Rocq Prover version 9.0 includes compatibility shims that make it possible
to invoke it through legacy Coq commands: `coq-tex`, `coq_makefile`, `coqchk`, `coqdoc`, `coqpp`, `coqtop`,
`coqwc`, `coqc`, `coqdep`, `coqnative`, `coqtimelog2html`, `coqtop.byte`, `coqworkmgr`.
When using `opam`, this compatibility
```

> layer is available through packages `coq-core`, `coq-stdlib` and `coq`. In this setting,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layer is provided by the packages `coq-core`, `coq-stdlib`, and `coq`. In this setting,
```

> nothing needs to be changed to an existing project to compile with `Rocq 9.0` (aliased as `Coq 9.0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no changes are needed to compile an existing project with Rocq 9.0.
```

Reviewer 3: BTW, do we want to be pore precise: of course changes may be needed, just not to the build process

Author: I tried to be more precise

You should expect warnings that the standard library previously under namespace

> `Coq` has been renamed to `Stdlib` (and moved to a `separate repository
> <https://github.com/coq/stdlib>`_), but these warnings are independent of the
> `Coq` to `Rocq` renaming. See `this entry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Coq` has been renamed to `Stdlib`. See `this entry
```
(the details are irrelevant in this porting section (and redundant with the main summary of changes))

`Coq` has been renamed to `Stdlib`. See `this entry
<https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman-stdlib/changes.html#changed>`_ from
the Standard Library's changelog for the suggested workflow to port theories.

There are important changes to consider for building plugins and libraries:

- To be future-proof, projects based on `coq_makefile` can be ported to not rely
  on the compatibility layer anymore. To do so, one must replace uses of

>   `coq_makefile` with :ref:`rocq makefile <rocq_makefile>`, which will directly

Reviewer 3: maybe
```suggestion
  `coq_makefile` with :ref:`rocq makefile`, which will directly
```
(the assymetry with `<rocq_makefile>` is a tad disturbing)

Reviewer: Careful! This is a `:ref:`. I am not sure Sphinx automatically converts spaces to underscores.

Reviewer 3: You're right, I misread that, please ignore my comment.

- If using `dune` (TODO <= 3.17.2) to :ref:`build <building_dune>` a Rocq project, you will still
  need the compatibility shim for `coq-core` so that `dune`'s Coq language extension functions correctly.
  This issue has been solved in `dune` TODO.

Regarding packaging:

> - Opam packages depending on the coq shim should keep being named coq-\*, whereas
>   actually ported packages should be named rocq-\* and replace the coq dependency by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Opam packages that depend on the compatibility shims should remain named as `coq-*`, whereas
  ported packages should be named `rocq-*`, with the `coq` dependency being replaced by
```

Author: Applied

>   `rocq-core` or `rocq-stdlib` (but **not** `rocq-prover` which is only a user-oriented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `rocq-core` and `rocq-stdlib` (but **not** `rocq-prover` which is only a user-oriented
```

Reviewer 3: No, it's really an or. If only because you may not depend on rocq-stdlib.

Reviewer 3: (of course, one may want to put version bounds on both rocq-core and rocq-stdlib, but that's another story)

Reviewer: Let us not make it more complicated than needed. As it stands, the sentence looks like a user could replace the dependency on `coq` by a dependency on only `rocq-stdlib`. This is bad advice.

Author: Hmm, I added a parenthetical remark about packages not depending on rocq-stdlib. Does it satisfy everyone?

Reviewer 3: LGTM, thanks!

  metapackage).

> - Similarly for Nix, packages using the shim can be kept in `coqPackages` and
>   keep depending on `coq` whereas actually ported packages can be added in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Similarly, Nix packages that use the compatibility shims can be kept in `coqPackages` (and can
  keep depending on `coq`), whereas ported packages can be added to
```

used to build Rocq itself and many Rocq projects.

The `opam repository <https://github.com/coq/opam>`_ for Rocq packages has been maintained by
Guillaume Claret, Guillaume Melquiond, Karl Palmskog, Matthieu Sozeau
and Enrico Tassi with contributions from many users. The up-to-data list
of packages is `available on the Rocq website <https://rocq-prover.org/packages>`_.

Erik Martin-Dorel and Jaime Arias maintained the
`Rocq Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/r/rocq/rocq-prover>`_.
Erik Martin-Dorel maintained the `docker-keeper <https://gitlab.com/erikmd/docker-keeper>`_ compiler
used to build and keep those images up to date (note that the tool is not Rocq specific).
Erik Martin-Dorel and Théo Zimmermann maintained the
`docker-coq-action <https://github.com/coq-community/docker-coq-action>`_
container action (which is applicable to any opam project hosted on GitHub).

Cyril Cohen, Vincent Laporte, Pierre Roux and Théo Zimmermann
maintained the `Nix toolbox <https://github.com/coq-community/coq-nix-toolbox>`_.
The docker-coq-action and the Nix toolbox are used by many Rocq projects for continuous integration.

Rocq 9.0 was made possible thanks to the following 29 reviewers:

> Yves Bertot, Ali Caglayan, Tej Chajed, Louise Dubois de Prisque, Andres Erbsen, Jim Fehrle, Gaëtan Gilbert, Jason Gross, Samuel Gruetter, Hugo Herbelin, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Evgenii Kosogorov, Thomas Lamiaux, Olivier Laurent, Rodolphe Lepigre, Erik Martin-Dorel, Guillaume Melquiond, Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni, Karl Palmskog palmskog

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Yves Bertot, Ali Caglayan, Tej Chajed, Louise Dubois de Prisque, Andres Erbsen, Jim Fehrle, Gaëtan Gilbert, Jason Gross, Samuel Gruetter, Hugo Herbelin, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Evgenii Kosogorov, Thomas Lamiaux, Olivier Laurent, Rodolphe Lepigre, Erik Martin-Dorel, Guillaume Melquiond, Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni, Karl Palmskog
```

`coqwc`, `coqc`, `coqdep`, `coqnative`, `coqtimelog2html`, `coqtop.byte`, `coqworkmgr`.
When using `opam`, this compatibility layer is available through packages `coq-core`,
`coq-stdlib` and `coq`. In this setting, nothing needs to be changed to the build systems
of existing projects to compile with `Rocq 9.0` (aliased as `Coq 9.0`).

You should expect warnings that the standard library previously under namespace
`Coq` has been renamed to `Stdlib`. See `this entry
<https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman-stdlib/changes.html#changed>`_ from
the Standard Library's changelog for the suggested workflow to port theories.

There are important changes to consider for building plugins and libraries:

- To be future-proof, projects based on `coq_makefile` can be ported to not rely
  on the compatibility layer anymore. To do so, one must replace uses of
  `coq_makefile` with :ref:`rocq makefile <rocq_makefile>`, which will directly
  call the new `rocq` binary without relying on the compatibility shims.

- If using `dune` to :ref:`build <building_dune>` a Rocq project, you will still
  need the compatibility shim for `coq-core` so that `dune`'s Coq language extension

>   functions correctly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  function correctly.
```

Summary of changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Rocq Prover version 9.0 is the first Rocq Prover release after the renaming

> from The Coq Proof Assistant. The Rocq Prover 9.0 is backwards compatible with

Reviewer 4: maybe say "the command line" is backwards compatible since I think we do have compatibility breaking changes otherwise

Coq 8.20, providing compatitibility shims so that developments depending on Coq
can be easily ported, see `Porting to The Rocq Prover`_  for details. The 9.0 version
is based on a new single binary `rocq` that dispatches commands to previously
separate binaries, a split and renaming of the standard library to `Stdlib` and
an internal encoding of template-polymorphism in terms of the

> more general notion of sort polymorphism.

Reviewer 4: Strictly speaking tmplate poly in 9.0 is not internally encoded in terms of sort poly, rather its theory was rethought in terms of sort poly and the implementation changed to be closer (specifically to remove the extra generated constraints). PRs like https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/19985 which actually implement it in terms of sort poly are for 9.1.

Author: Fixed

We highlight some of the most impactful changes here:

  - "The Rocq Prover" is the new official name of the project. We leave to users the
  choice of renaming their projects to reflect this change, see `Renaming advice`_.

  - A single `rocq` binary dispatches commands for compilation, read-eval-print-loop,

>   documentation building, dependency compatutation, etc... see :ref:`therocqcommands`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  documentation building, dependency computation, etc... see :ref:`therocqcommands`.
```

  This is a bare-bones package not depending on any Gallina code.
  CHECK LINK

  - The `Coq` standard library has been split and renamed into two libraries. A
  `Corelib` core library (an extended prelude corresponding to the `rocq-core` OCaml package,
  binding to run `rocq-runtime`'s OCaml code).
  and an `Stdlib` standard library (the `rocq-stdlib` opam package).
  The `Stdlib` is now maintained `out of <https://github.com/rocq-prover/stdlib>`
  the main `rocq` `repository <http://github/com/rocq-prover/rocq>`. FIX LINKS

Notable breaking changes:

  - TODO

See the `Changes in 9.0`_ section below for the detailed list of changes,
including potentially breaking changes marked with **Changed**.
Coq's `reference manual for 9.0 <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman>`_, TODO fix links
documentation of the 9.0 `core <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/corelib>`_ and
`standard <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/stdlib>`_ libraries,
`reference manual of the 9.0 standard library <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/refman-stdlib>`_
and `developer documentation of the 9.0 ML API <https://rocq-prover.org/doc/v9.0/api>`_
are also available.

> The Rocq Prover comes with a new website the was developped by Matthieu Sozeau,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Rocq Prover comes with a new website that was developped by Matthieu Sozeau,
```
or maybe "which"?

Nicolas Tabareau and Théo Zimmermann, in collaboration with Bastien Sozeau of the
`Noir Blanc Rouge <https://noirblancrouge.com/>` type foundry. The new website is
a fork of the `OCaml.org <https://ocaml.org>` website developed by mainly by
`Tarides <https://tarides.com/>`. The Rocq development team is thankful for
their help and for open-sourcing their website. It includes full support for the
`Rocq package archive <https://github.com/coq/opam>`, a responsive design and easy
contributions through markdown files. The new identity, customized fonts and logo
were designed by Bastien Sozeau, consulting for the Rocq development team. They are

> released under a permissive open-source license.

Author: logo is under UNLICENSE, @BastienSozeau what about the fonts?

> Théo Zimmermann with help from Ali Caglayan and Jason Gross maintained

Reviewer 4: not sure if Ali is still involved cc @Alizter

Author: Removed

TODO

The Coq/Rocq community at large helped improve this new version via
the GitHub issue and pull request system, the coq-club@inria.fr mailing list,
the `Discourse forum <https://coq.discourse.group/>`_ and the
`Coq Zulip chat <https://coq.zulipchat.com>`_.

Version 9.0's development spanned 7 months from the release of Coq 8.20.0.
Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau are the release managers of Rocq 9.0.
This release is the result of ?? merged PRs, closing ?? issues.

| Nantes, January 2025
| Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau for the Rocq development team

Porting to The Rocq Prover
--------------------------

The Rocq Prover version 9.0 includes support for compability shims that allow
to call it through legacy Coq commands (`coqtop`, `coqdep`, `coq_makefile`, `coqdoc`, TODO ...),
so that it can act as a regular `Coq` version. If using `opam`, this compatibility
layer is available through packages `coq-core`, `coq-stdlib` and `coq`. In this setting,
nothing needs to be changed to an existing project to compile with `Rocq 9.0` (aliased as `Coq 9.0`).

You should expect warnings that the standard library previously under namespace `Coq` has been renamed to

> `Stdlib` and moved to a `separate repositiory <https://github.com/coq/stdlib>`_, but these warnings are

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`Stdlib` and moved to a `separate repository <https://github.com/coq/stdlib>`_, but these warnings are
```

Author: Fixed

from The Coq Proof Assistant. The Rocq Prover 9.0.0 is backwards compatible with
Coq 8.20, providing compatibility shims so that developments depending on Coq
can be easily ported, see `Porting to The Rocq Prover`_  for details. The 9.0 version
is based on a new single binary `rocq` that dispatches commands to previously
separate binaries, a split and renaming of the standard library to `Stdlib` and
an internal encoding of template-polymorphism in terms of the
more general notion of sort polymorphism.

We highlight some of the most impactful changes here:

  - "The Rocq Prover" is the new official name of the project. We leave to users the
    choice of renaming their projects to reflect this change, see `Renaming Advice`_.
    The Rocq Prover comes with a new visual identity and website, see `The Rocq Prover Website`_.

  - A single `rocq` binary dispatches commands for compilation, read-eval-print-loop,
    documentation building, dependency computation, etc... see :ref:`therocqcommands`.
    It corresponds to the `rocq-runtime` `OCaml package <https://ocaml.org/p/rocq-runtime>`_.
    This is a bare-bones package not depending on any Gallina code.
    CHECK LINK

>   - The `Coq` standard library has been renamed and :ref:`split and <90stdlib>` into two libraries:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - The `Coq` standard library has been renamed and :ref:`split <90stdlib>` into two libraries:
```

>     - A `Corelib` core library. This is an extended prelude corresponding to the `rocq-core`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - A `Corelib` core library (the `rocq-core` opam package). This is an extended prelude corresponding to the `rocq-core`
```

>       OCaml package, which is enough to run `rocq` tactics and contains the `Ltac2` library.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a word about primitive types specifications.

Author: Indeed

    - An `Stdlib` standard library (the `rocq-stdlib` opam package). The `Stdlib` is
      now maintained `out of <https://github.com/rocq-prover/stdlib>`_ the main `rocq`
      `repository <http://github/com/rocq-prover/rocq>`_.

>       FIX LINKS

Reviewer 3: Maybe a word about the fact that we welcome new contributors/maintainer (call to come soon)?

Guillaume Claret, Guillaume Melquiond, Karl Palmskog, Matthieu Sozeau
and Enrico Tassi with contributions from many users. The up-to-data list
of packages is `available on the Rocq website <https://rocq-prover.org/packages>`_.

Rocq 9.0 was made possible thanks to the following reviewers:
TODO

See the `Rocq Team <https://rocq-prover.org/governance>`_ page for
more details on Rocq's development teams.

The ?? contributors to the 9.0 version are:
TODO

The Coq/Rocq community at large helped improve this new version via
the GitHub issue and pull request system, the coq-club@inria.fr mailing list,
the `Discourse forum <https://coq.discourse.group/>`_ and the
`Coq Zulip chat <https://coq.zulipchat.com>`_.

Version 9.0's development spanned 7 months from the release of Coq 8.20.0.
Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau are the release managers of Rocq 9.0.
This release is the result of ?? merged PRs, closing ?? issues.

| Nantes, January 2025
| Pierre-Marie Pédrot and Matthieu Sozeau for the Rocq development team

Porting to The Rocq Prover
--------------------------

The Rocq Prover version 9.0 includes support for compability shims that allow

> to call it through legacy Coq commands (`coqtop`, `coqdep`, `coq_makefile`, `coqdoc`, TODO ...),

Reviewer 3: the complete list here is: `coq-tex, coq_makefile, coqchk, coqdoc, coqpp, coqtop, coqwc, coqc, coqdep, coqnative, coqtimelog2html, coqtop.byte, coqworkmgr`

Author: Done

so that it can act as a regular `Coq` version. If using `opam`, this compatibility
layer is available through packages `coq-core`, `coq-stdlib` and `coq`. In this setting,
nothing needs to be changed to an existing project to compile with `Rocq 9.0` (aliased as `Coq 9.0`).

You should expect warnings that the standard library previously under namespace `Coq` has been renamed to

> `Stdlib` and moved to a `separate repositiory <https://github.com/coq/stdlib>`_, but these warnings are

Reviewer 3: Maybe just
```suggestion
`Stdlib`, but these warnings are
```
(the repository move is pretty irrelevant here)

> independent of the `Coq` to `Rocq` renaming.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a link to the precise changelog below that explain how to handle/silence the warning?

Author: Done

To be future-proof, projects based on `coq_makefile` can be ported to not rely on the compatibility

> layer anymore. To do so, one must replace uses of `coq_makefile` with :ref:`rocq_makefile`, which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
layer anymore. To do so, one must replace uses of `coq_makefile` with :ref:`rocq makefile`, which
```

Author: The ref is rocq_makefile, not rocq makefile, but indeed we want to display `rocq makefile`, fixed.

will directly call the new `rocq` binary without relying on the compatibility shims.

Beware, if using `dune` (TODO <= 3.17.2) to :ref:`build <building_dune>` a Rocq project, you will still
need the compatibility shim for `coq-core` so that `dune`'s Coq language extension functions correctly.
This issue has been solved in `dune` TODO.

> 

Reviewer 3: We should maybe add a paragraph about packages repo here, something like
"Opam packages depending on the coq shim should keep being named `coq-*`, whereas actually ported packages should be named `rocq-*` and replace the `coq` depency by `rocq-core` or `rocq-stdlib` (but not `rocq-prover` which is only a user-oriented metapackage)."
and about nix
"Similarly for nixpkgs, packages using the shim can be kept in `coqPackages` and keep depending on `coq` whereas actually ported packages can be added in `rocqPackages`, depending on `rocq-core`."
and maybe
"In both cases, when a rocq porting is done, a coq metapckage can be kept, simply depending on the new rocq package and coq."

Author: Thanks, I reused your wording

Renaming Advice
---------------

We have applied the `renaming <https://rocq-prover.org/about#Name>`_ from the
Coq Proof Assistant to The Rocq Prover in this version, and officialy supported
projects in the `Rocq organization <https://github.com/rocq-prover>`_ will be
renamed in the future. The Rocq Development Team's official position on renaming of

> projects it does not officially maintain is to let their authors do as they wish.

Reviewer 3: maybe
```suggestion
projects-it-does-not-officially-maintain is to let their authors do as they wish.
```
if it can help reading

Author: Tried with italic rather, let's see how it displays

Author: I like it https://coq.gitlabpages.inria.fr/-/coq/-/jobs/5267634/artifacts/_build/default/doc/refman-html/changes.html#version-9-0

  (`#19975 <https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/19686>`_,
  by Pierre Roux).
- **Added:**

>   a new ``rocq`-core` package for users who don't want to depend on Stdlib.

Reviewer 4: ??

Author: Fixed
